Normalization docs (#896)
elevenlabs/elevenlabs-docs: fern/docs/pages/best-practices/prompting/normalization.mdx

---
title: Normalization
subtitle: Learn how to normalize text for Text to Speech.
---

> When using Text to Speech in the ElevenLabs dashboard or when using Conversational AI, you may have noticed that the audio output doesn't always sound as expected. This is often due to the text not being normalized correctly. For example, phone numbers and currencies can be read out in a way that isn't clear for the user. This guide will clarify when those discrepancies happen and how to mitigate them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using Text to Speech with complex items like phone numbers, zip codes and emails they might be mispronounced. This is often due to the model seeing the item for the first time. This guide will clarify when those discrepancies happen and how to have them pronounced correctly.
```

## Why do models read out inputs differently?

Certain models are trained to read out numbers and phrases in a more human way. For instance, the phrase "$1,000,000" is correctly read out as "one million dollars" by the Eleven Multilingual v2 model. However, the same phrase is read out as "one thousand thousand dollars" by the Eleven Flash v2.5 model.

> The reason for this is that the Multilingual v2 model has been trained to recognize and read out numbers in a way that is more natural for human listeners, whereas the Flash v2.5 model has not. This is not a design flaw, but rather a conscious decision in order to make the Flash model faster and to consume less credits.

Reviewer: I think it's more due to it being a smaller model so more error prone + reduced normalization

### Common examples

Text to Speech models can struggle with the following:

- Phone numbers ("123-456-7890")
- Currencies ("$47,345.67")
- Calendar events ("2024-01-01")
- Time ("9:23 AM")
- Addresses ("123 Main St, Anytown, USA")
- URLs ("example.com/link/to/resource")
- Abbreviations for units ("TB" instead of "Terabyte")
- Shortcuts ("Ctrl + Z")

## Mitigation

### Use trained models

> The simplest way to mitigate this is to use a TTS model that is trained to read out numbers and phrases in a more human way, such as the Eleven Multilingual v2 model. This however might not always be possible, for instance if you have a use case where low latency is critical (e.g. Conversational AI).

Reviewer: I wonder if we just cut this part? Have you seen that Mulitlingual v2 is substantially better? my assumption is it still gets it wrong a lot too

Author: In my testing with the above prompts I've found that multilingual v2 has done way better. Don't mind cutting this if you don't think it's useful.

Reviewer: Good to know, worth keeping then

### Apply normalization in LLM prompts

In the case of using an LLM to generate the text for TTS, you can add normalization instructions to the prompt.

> <Steps>

Reviewer: I think instead of the below we should just give them one prompt that they can include that covers a range of items? And then can cut out certain parts as needed

Author: I think the danger there is that we would be suggesting that this one prompt solves all normalization problems, which we can't guarantee. Instead I think this should function as a guide to get you started rather than pretend to have the solution for every edge case.

Reviewer: In that case can we make sure each section has a prompt. Then at the end do a "Putting it all together". And suggest to adapt to their use case and preferred style?

Although in reality I'd hope we could end up with a prompt which is pretty good overall

Author: Decided to add a big prompt at the end anyway with some language that it's a starting point rather than a comprehensive solution.

        Common abbreviations should be expanded for clarity:

        - "Dr." → "Doctor"
        - "Ave." → "Avenue"
        - "St." → "Street" (but "St. Patrick" should remain)

        You can request explicit expansion in your prompt:

        > Expand all abbreviations to their full spoken forms.

    </Step>
    <Step title="Alphanumeric normalization">
        Not all normalization is about numbers, certain alphanumeric phrases should also be normalized for clarity:

        - Shortcuts: "Ctrl + Z" → "control z"
        - Abbreviations for units: "100km" → "one hundred kilometers"
        - Symbols: "100%" → "one hundred percent"
        - URLs: "elevenlabs.io/docs" → "eleven labs dot io slash docs"
        - Calendar events: "2024-01-01" → "January first, two-thousand twenty-four"
    </Step>
    <Step title="Consider edge cases">
        Different contexts might require different conversions:

        - Dates: "01/02/2023" → "January second, twenty twenty-three" or "the first of February, twenty twenty-three" (depending on locale)
        - Time: "14:30" → "two thirty PM"

        If you need a specific format, explicitly state it in the prompt.
    </Step>

</Steps>

> ### Use Regular Expressions for preprocessing

Reviewer: I like this, let's keep it

        }

        // Handle whole numbers
        return `${toWords(Number.parseInt(numWithoutCommas))} ${currencyMap[currency] || 'currency'}`;
      })

      // Convert phone numbers (e.g., "555-555-5555" → "five five five, five five five, five five five five")
      .replace(/(\d{3})-(\d{3})-(\d{4})/g, (_, p1, p2, p3) => {
        return `${spellOutDigits(p1)}, ${spellOutDigits(p2)}, ${spellOutDigits(p3)}`;
      })
  );
}

// Helper function to spell out individual digits as words (for phone numbers)
function spellOutDigits(num: string): string {
  return num
    .split('')
    .map((digit) => toWords(Number.parseInt(digit)))
    .join(' ');
}

// Example usage
console.log(normalizeText('$1,000')); // "one thousand dollars"
console.log(normalizeText('£1000')); // "one thousand pounds"
console.log(normalizeText('€1000')); // "one thousand euros"
console.log(normalizeText('¥1000')); // "one thousand yen"
console.log(normalizeText('$1,234.56')); // "one thousand two hundred thirty-four dollars and fifty-six cents"
console.log(normalizeText('555-555-5555')); // "five five five, five five five, five five five five"
```

> </CodeBlocks>

Reviewer: should we have a section about the normalization parts?

Author: Can you clarify what you mean here?

Reviewer: https://elevenlabs.io/docs/api-reference/text-to-speech/convert#request.body.apply_text_normalization

Reviewer: and we should check `Cannot be turned on for ‘eleven_turbo_v2_5’ model.` and whether it works for flash or not

---
title: Normalization
subtitle: Learn how to normalize text for Text to Speech.
---

When using Text to Speech with complex items like phone numbers, zip codes and emails they might be mispronounced. This is often due to the model seeing the item for the first time. This guide will clarify when those discrepancies happen and how to have them pronounced correctly.

## Why do models read out inputs differently?

Certain models are trained to read out numbers and phrases in a more human way. For instance, the phrase "$1,000,000" is correctly read out as "one million dollars" by the Eleven Multilingual v2 model. However, the same phrase is read out as "one thousand thousand dollars" by the Eleven Flash v2.5 model.

> The reason for this is that the Multilingual v2 model has been trained to recognize and read out numbers in a way that is more natural for human listeners, whereas the Flash v2.5 model is a much smaller model which has not. This is not a design flaw, but rather a conscious decision in order to make the Flash model faster and to consume less credits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason for this is that the Multilingual v2 model has been trained to recognize and read out numbers in a way that is more natural for human listeners, whereas the Flash v2.5 model is a much smaller model which has not.
```

I'm pretty sure it is a design issue so wonder if we should just say this?
